Title: Virtual Electric Machines Laboratory, Requirements and Practical Realization
Authors: P.J. van Duijsen, D.C. Zuidervliet
Year: 2023
Conference: CE or EE (Computers in Education / Engineering Education)
Priority: HIGH - Need FULL PAPER

Relevance: Virtual lab implementation - directly relevant to IaC Progressive Learning idea

Abstract:
A fully equipped electrical machine laboratory can
become a costly factor. However the look and feel of electrical
machines behavior in operation, is indispensable and very in-
formative for students. Not only do they learn how to connect
and operate the machines, but also the limitations of each type
of machine, becomes visible. Not only equipment is costly, also
laboratory room space, service and safety can become an issue.
To reduce those laboratory costs, often simulation is used as
an alternative. However, the look and feel of the real machines,
is in many cases lost. In this paper a virtual electric machines
laboratory is proposed, where students can be trained, using
digital twins of the electric machines from the laboratory. The
look and feel of the digital twins, the way the machines are
connected electrically and mechanically, should represent their
physical counterparts in such detail, as required in a real physical
training set-up. Nameplate parameters ease the selection of
machines size and power level. Adding measurement devices,
such as voltage and current meters, as well as measuring torque
and rotational speed, should resemble the real measurement set-
up as close as possible.
The size and power level of the electrical machine, is given
by its nameplate. In the virtual electrical machine model, those
parameters are entered, instead of the electrical parameters
mostly encountered in simulation programs.


---
Notes after reading abstract:


---
Full Paper:

Virtual Electric Machines Laboratory, Requirements
and Practical Realization
P.J. van Duijsen∗, D.C. Zuidervliet†
THUAS, Delft, The Netherlands, www.dc-lab.org
∗p.j.vanduijsen@hhs.nl †d.c.zuidervliet@hhs.nl
Abstract—A fully equipped electrical machine laboratory can
become a costly factor. However the look and feel of electrical
machines behavior in operation, is indispensable and very in-
formative for students. Not only do they learn how to connect
and operate the machines, but also the limitations of each type
of machine, becomes visible. Not only equipment is costly, also
laboratory room space, service and safety can become an issue.
To reduce those laboratory costs, often simulation is used as
an alternative. However, the look and feel of the real machines,
is in many cases lost. In this paper a virtual electric machines
laboratory is proposed, where students can be trained, using
digital twins of the electric machines from the laboratory. The
look and feel of the digital twins, the way the machines are
connected electrically and mechanically, should represent their
physical counterparts in such detail, as required in a real physical
training set-up. Nameplate parameters ease the selection of
machines size and power level. Adding measurement devices,
such as voltage and current meters, as well as measuring torque
and rotational speed, should resemble the real measurement set-
up as close as possible.
The size and power level of the electrical machine, is given
by its nameplate. In the virtual electrical machine model, those
parameters are entered, instead of the electrical parameters
mostly encountered in simulation programs.
Index Terms—Virtual workbench, electric machines, simula-
tion, animation, education, laboratory
I. INTRODUCTION
VIrtual electrical machines laboratories, will not be the
replacement of a real physical laboratory. However, when
teaching large numbers of students, with limited availability
of costly laboratory equipment, it requires an alternative. A
virtual laboratory would be the first thing that comes into mind
when thinking about costs reduction. However, using such a
virtual laboratory, places constraints on the way the virtual
laboratory looks like. The main requirement for a practical
realization of such a virtual laboratory, is simply that it should
look and behave similar.
An overview and role of a laboratory for teaching electrical
machines is an ongoing topic in the society meetings of
the IEEE [1]. Especially in graduate courses, the use of
simulation to replace the physical laboratory is a topic, that is
discussed over the years. The first approaches only discuss
the replacement of the laboratory by simulation [2]. The
simulations are still only numerical, in the beginning of the
application of computers in education [3]. The limitations
of computer graphics, hampered the introduction of useful
simulation environments. Also the complicated mix of block-
diagram models, not representing physical component, makes
simulation unattractive for undergraduate courses. Only grad-
uate courses can profit from simulations, as these students
understand the mathematics behind he electrical machines, and
thus can apply the numerical models simulating the electrical
machines, as for example presented in [4]. Also using equiva-
lent electric circuit models, to model the electrical machines,
is only dedicated towards graduate students, understanding the
differential equations describing both the electrical machines
and electric circuit components [5]. Remote labs [6], tried to
fill the gap, and replace the laboratory with access to a remote
laboratory. However also this remote laboratory could only be
used by a limited number of students. The use of simulation
programs alone, mainly remained a dedicated set of complex
simulation models, requiring understanding of the models and
parameters [7]. All of these simulation approaches are not fully
applicable in vocational training. Vocational training requires
models based rated values or nameplate parameters. Internally
these models contain the complex equations, modeling all
the phenomena, existing in a physical laboratory set-up. For
undergraduate graduate students, the level of complexity can
be increased and brushless motors and their controls are
usually employed in laboratory experiments [8]. The topic of
field oriented control is usually seen in graduate laboratory
experiments, mostly in the form of simulation experiments [9],
[10].
The main reason for implementing a virtual laboratory
is given in section II. In section III the requirements on
a virtual laboratory are outlined. The structure of a virtual
laboratory is described in section IV. The objectives are the
same as for a physical laboratory and outlined in section V.
Examples of an induction machine and universal motor are
presented in section VI. The next step in going more into
detail, requires simulation and animation, and two typical
examples, are discussed in section VII
II. VIRTUAL LABORATORY
The main reason for introducing a virtual laboratory for ed-
ucation, are not the costs related to a real physical laboratory,
but the main reason is that in a virtual laboratory, you can set-
up experiments very quickly, and without any risk whatsoever.
You can do any experiment, without damaging the laboratory
equipment, and no matter how extraordinary, you can build
MIPRO 2023/EE 1845
Tacho
N= 907.091 rpm
N= 907.091 rpm
SCOPE1
V= 24 volt
V= 24 volt
-3 3
PMDC
+ -
1.960
Ampere DC
Vdc
Fig. 1. Permanent Magnet DC motor driving a fan. Current is measured using an analog current meter, while a tachometer measures the speed of the rotor.
the most unrealistic experiments and learn from the mistakes.
This is the main reason, since learning from mistakes is mostly
what is remembered best. The background level of the students
is the same as they need for a physical laboratory experiment.
A. Motivation
Students should get a low entry-level access, into laboratory
experiments. The look and feel is important, but also the
experience of doing things wrong, adds to the knowledge of
the students. Especially the freedom to create experiments, that
in real life would cause damage, contributes to the knowledge
and experience level of the student. As long as the laboratory
components have the same look and feel, as the real laboratory
components, it contributes to the practical training of students.
B. Challenges/Risks
A virtual laboratory is undoubtedly cheaper than a physical
laboratory. Students can have access to the virtual laboratory at
any time and place they like and are not bounded to availability
of the laboratory space. This also creates the possibility to use
the virtual laboratory as demonstration during oral lectures.
The virtual laboratory experiments should be carried out
in the same way, as a face-to-face traditional laboratory
is organized. The tutor also has the same role during the
experiments.
However, the risk is that students do not get access to a real
laboratory environment, once the virtual lab is implemented.
Management could cancel the physical laboratory for costs
saving reasons.
C. Results
Due to the faster set-up of a laboratory experiment, without
any risk of doing something wrong or destroying something,
students can get results quicker. Instead of doing a single
experiment, what-if scenarios are possible, not only by the
students, but also by the teachers, when preparing lectures or
experiments.
D. Outcomes
Application of the virtual laboratory in Delft [11], showed
that students got a deeper understanding of the operation of
electric machines, because they had the possibility to virtually
experiment with the electric machines of any size and power
level. The examples from section VI are implemented and
tested, in a second year undergraduate course on electric
machines in Delft [11]. The drive simulation from section VII,
are to be used in a third year undergraduate or second year
graduate course. The examples from section VI can also be
implemented in second and third year vocational training.
However, here it is advised to have pre-programmed examples,
where students only have to change parameters like power
level of an electric machine, or power supply output voltage.
III. REQUIREMENTS
To prepare students, to do practical laboratory tests, requires
them to train using simulation tools. However simulation
tools do provide nice models for electrical machines, but also
require parameters. This is manageable by undergraduate and
graduate students, but impossible for students of vocational
training and first semester undergraduate students. For them,
the nameplate parameters are the first encounter, in identifying
electrical machines.
A virtual laboratory [10], should mimic the real labora-
tory [11]. Each component in the virtual laboratory should
reassemble a physical component from the real laboratory. Not
only should the look and feel be the same, also connecting
the components should be the same as if the students would
connect the physical machines, see figure 1.
Models should also have the limitation of the real set-up,
for example, measuring the angular speed using a tachometer,
gives an indication of the angular speed in the range of 0 to 5
volts. The students will understand that there is a conversion
factor, when going from RPM to an analog voltage, that can
be measured in an electric circuit.
Figure 2 shows a typical laboratory set-up. An inverter is
driving a three-phase brushless motor, and a tachometer is
measuring the speed. Students can change the DC voltage of
1846 MIPRO 2023/EE
the inverter, and this changes the amount of current supplied
to the brushless motor. As this is a typical experiment for
vocational training, the DC voltage to drive speed relation can
be measured using DC voltage meters.
Fig. 3. Name plate parameters of the Permanent Magnet DC motor, including
the number of rotor and stator poles for the animation of the motor.
Fig. 2. Physical laboratory set-up, of three phase inverter U4L [11] with
brushless DC motor and DC motor acting as tachometer.
To convert the laboratory experiment from figure 2 into a
virtual laboratory experiment, the virtual experiment has to ful-
fill some constraints. The virtual laboratory model should have
realistic parameters. The brushless motor from figure 2 has
typical manufacturer data like nominal voltage, nominal speed
and power level. This has to be supplied by the student in the
virtual experiment, see figure 3. Also the student should carry
out the measurement in the same way as in the real experiment.
In simulation, graphic display of waveforms and numerical
results are easy to obtain, but in this virtual experiment, the
student has only access to a multimeter and eventually an
oscilloscope for recording the waveforms. Finally the virtual
workbench should show an animation of what would happen
in the real experiment. For electrical machines, this can be
done by showing the rotation of the rotor and, additionally,
the rotation of electromagnetic fields in stator and/or rotor.
To mimic the laboratory experiment as realistic as possible,
a virtual laboratory assignment should include:
• Connecting the components via wires with banana-plugs.
• Set parameters and/or choose the size/power rating of a
component.
• Connect measuring devices like analog voltage or current
meters, or digital multimeters.
• Start the experiment, instead of turning on the power
supply, the simulation/animation has to be started.
• Observation of the results from the measuring devices.
• Change parameters(power/size rating) and observe their
influence on the results.
• Validate the observation of the results.
IV. STRUCTURE
The structure of a virtual laboratory should be able to
Conceive, Design, Implement and Operate the experiments in
an engineering environment, being creative and value added
according to the CDIO-Initiative [12]. Each phase of the
experiment can be structured according to this initiative.
• Conceive: Theory
A short introduction on the theory behind the experiment
from the textbook. Here the basics of the functioning
should be outlined, without going into detail on the
operation.
• Design: Simulation
Simulation or animation, with simple model to explore
working principle using simulation or online tooling [10].
This will reveal the operation as explained in the theory.
• Implement: Set-up
Virtual laboratory set-up, with virtual components and
animation. Select and place components and interconnect
them.
• Operate: Validation
Run the experiment. Validation of the virtual laboratory
results, with the theoretical and/or simulation results.
Comparison with expectations, and explanation of the
observed laboratory results.
V. OBJECTIVES
In the virtual electric machines laboratory assignment, the
objectives are the same, as for a physical laboratory. They can
be extended with giving insight in phenomena’s, that are only
visible through animation.
A. Electromechanical
An easy start for undergraduate students is the permanent
magnet DC motor, see figure 1. The only important parameter
is the motor constant.
2π
U= k· ω= k·
N (1)
60
T= k· I (2)
where k is the motor constant describing the most important
relation between electrical and mechanical quantities. How-
ever, for undergraduate students, this motor constant can be
hidden as a parameter, if the student only has to enter machine
nameplate parameters like, nominal voltage, nominal speed
MIPRO 2023/EE 1847
Digital Multimeter
Vdc= 1.479 volt
Vdc= 1.479 volt
Vdc
Rotation
P= 446.624 Watt
P= 446.624 Watt
Vrms= 326.229 volt
Vrms= 326.229 volt
L1
L2
L3
N
Urms= 230.679[V]
Irms= 943.677m[A]
P = 620.983[W]
pf = 950.883m
IM
Io =0[A]
SCOPE1
Pac 3phase
Vac3@
@
T
N
P
Fig. 4. Simulation of the torque-speed characteristic of an induction machine driving a fan.
and nominal power, see figure 3. From this data, the machine
constant k is calculated using (1), and used internally in
the model. Vocational training students, can simply choose
the motor based on voltage and power level. Undergraduate
students can calculate the motor constant k and verify (1).
B. Winding resistance
The winding resistance is the first parameter that defines
the losses of the electrical machine. It can be measured at an
early stage, using a simple multimeter. The influence of the
damping effect of the winding resistance on regulation and
stability, is not yet to be measured in this stage of a virtual
laboratory, however it can be noticed in the dynamic behavior.
C. Winding inductance
If the machine is kept at standstill using the dynamometer,
the impedance of the winding can be measured. Impedance
can be measured using an AC signal generator and AC current
meter. Since the winding resistance is already known, the
winding inductance can be estimated. Knowing the impedance,
one can set the correct parameters in a proportional-integration
[PI] controlled, current regulated AC drive. Graduate students
can measure the winding resistance and inductance, and use
this for calculating the PI parameters of the Field Oriented
Control [FOC] [9].
D. Magnetic field of the stator and rotor
Understanding what is happening inside the machine, can be
visualized using the animation in the virtual laboratory. A re-
volving field inside the motor alongside the revolving currents
in the windings, is shown as animation. Students can see the
asynchronous fields in induction machines, and synchronous
commutation of phase currents in brushless machines. Espe-
cially vocational training student and undergraduate students,
have a need for visualization of magnetic fields, as their
curriculum does not incorporate 2D/3D electromagnetic field
analysis.
E. How is Torque created?
The concept of torque creation by the outer product between
current and field T = Ψ× I, is easily visualized in animation.
It is also numerically visible in the measuring device. The
linear relation between current and torque in DC motors, can
be measured by the vocational training and undergraduate
students, by simply adjusting the power supply. Graduate
students are challenged to express and verify this relation,
using the outer product of current and field.
F. How does terminal voltage arise?
Adjusting the angular speed of the motor using the dy-
namometer, or changing the field producing current in a DC
shunt motor, shows the variation of the terminal voltage of
the motor. This is a typical experiment for vocational training,
as it is intuitive to see the proof of the mathematical relation
from (1).
VI. EXAMPLES
A. Induction Machine
An induction machine laboratory set-up, can be used for
many different experiments, see figure 4. Typically for in-
duction motors, compared to DC and brushless motors, is
the fact, that most of the induction motors are designed and
thus only operate at the operating voltage they are designed
for. This means that most of the smaller induction machines,
with affordable power rating for a laboratory are rated for
400volt/1kW. In vocational and undergraduate laboratory
classes, this can be a problem because of safety. There are
some exceptions [13] working on 23/40volt, but especially in
vocational training, measuring rated voltage and current levels,
gives more insight for the student on what to expect. The
23/40volt motors are especially suited for control experiments
using a low voltage inverter, since students can touch all wires
during operation. In the virtual laboratory, the machine ratings
1848 MIPRO 2023/EE
are like in a real drive. This means, that students can perform
measurements on 100kW motor, without any safety issues.
The winding resistance of the induction machine is simply
measured using a digital multimeter, see figure 5. From this
the winding losses can be estimated, if the induction machine
is in operation.
Digital Multimeter
R= 7.615 Ohm
R= 7.615 Ohm
Digital Multimeter
Iac= 4.845 A
Iac= 4.845 A
Iac[RMS]
Rotation
Dynamo Meter
P=-2.081 Watt
T=-4 Nm
P=-2.081 Watt T=-4 Nm
Ohm
Vrms= 325.231 volt
Vrms= 325.231 volt
L1
L2
L3
N
IM
Rotation
P= 20.202n Watt
P= 20.202n Watt
Vac3@
@
T
IM
N
P
@
T
N
P
Fig. 6. Application of a dynamometer to measure the slip of the induction
machine for varying load.
Fig. 5. Measuring the winding resistance using a multimeter.
The simulation of start-up in a virtual laboratory, allows the
recording and visualization of the torque-speed characteristic
of the induction machine, see figure 4. Interesting for students
is many times the observation, that is looks slightly more
complicated during start-up, than the ideal characteristic as
seen in most textbooks, see Scope1 in figure 4.
A typical assignment in an induction machine laboratory
is to measure the torque slip curve, see figure 6. Using a
dynamometer, the mechanical load of the rotor can be adjusted,
by specifying the load torque. The speed of the rotor can be
measured and tabulated, see table I.
A1 A2
+ -
Vrms= 229.698 volt
Vrms= 229.698 volt
Vac
SCOPE1
L1
L2
L3
N
Universal
P= 92.194 Watt
P= 92.194 Watt
TNP
Rotation
@
SCOPE2
Torque[Nm] Speed[rpm] slip[%]
-5 . .
. . .
. . .
5 . .
SCOPE3
N= 552.713 N= 552.713 rpm
rpm
Tacho
TABLE I
TORQUE-SPEED CHARACTERISTIC TO BE COMPLETED BY THE STUDENT
B. Universal motor
Running an universal motor from the mains AC power grid,
reveals a vibrating noise. In a virtual laboratory, using oscillo-
scopes, the origin of this audible noise can be visualized, see
figure 7. Although the students select an universal motor and
only specify nominal operating values, the underlying model
is more complex. It includes the saturation of the stator and
rotor iron in the internal model, however, this is not directly
visible to the students as a separate parameter. The internal
parameters are calculated from the rated values of the machine,
simplifying the set-up for the students.
First of all, power delivered from a single AC source is
pulsating at double supply frequency. Secondly the saturation
of the stator and rotor iron in the universal machine, gives
Fig. 7. Universal motor driving a fan, showing the typical torque harmonics.
rise to higher harmonics in the waveform for the current, see
Scope 1 in figure 7. Observing this current waveform, makes
explaining the torque pulsations easier, see Scope2 in figure 7.
Finally the resulting rotor speed can be seen, see Scope3 in
figure 7, explaining the audible noise.
VII. DRIVE SIMULATIONS
Once the students understand the working of machines, the
next step in an undergraduate course, is to add the controller
and use the machine in a drive system. From the laboratory
models, students can measure voltages, speed, current as
constant values. But in a drive, the dynamic behavior becomes
MIPRO 2023/EE 1849
important. The simulation becomes more detailed and also the
control parameters have to be added. Because of the many
wiring details and different required simulation results, the
simplified machine and drive models are better suited. Instead
of measuring constant values, start up behavior or transient
response becomes more important. The simulation in figure 8,
shows the start up of a variable speed drive with quadratic load
characteristic. Scope2 clearly shows the difference between
the motor and load torque, and from this the acceleration of
the motor can be explained. When both torque characteristics
meet, the drive is at stationary speed. Changing parameters like
load mass or inertia, driving voltage, machine size or machine
inertia, can be studied using this simulation.
NOTE1
SCOPE4
K=10 Tau=100ms
C_INERTIA1
DC
@ T
SCOPE1
V1 PI
+
600
-
PI1
AC T=k@2
1m
SCOPE3
@
Red:Torque-speed Electric machine Green: Torque-speed Load
M/G
PI
@
PROFILEPOSITION
INT
TIME INT
TIME11
@
@
time
s
10
vmax
12
amax
24
0
5
jmax
Tdelay
Thold
20
Tperiod
Fig. 9. Variable speed drive, where the angular speed of the machine is set by
a defined speed profile. The PI controller finally regulates the speed according
to the speed profile.
SCOPE2
SCOPE2
DC
@ T
SCOPE1
V1 AC
T=k@2
+
600
-
M/G
@ N T P[kW]
Power[Watt]
= 39.999k W
= 39.999k W
128
Torque
Fig. 8. Variable speed drive with quadratic load. Both motor torque and load
torque are displayed in a single scope2 as function of the rotor speed, to show
the remaining torque difference responsible for the acceleration of the drive.
The application of a speed or position profile in combination
with a variable speed drive, only makes sense when there is
adequate control. The variable speed drive blocks includes
a PI controller. Setting up such a simulation experiment
becomes easier when everything is integrated into a single
block and students are not distracted by the many details of the
control structure. They only have to set parameters of the PI
controller, like they would do in an industrial environment. The
simulation in figure 9 shows a given torque, speed and position
profile. The speed is the integral of the acceleration, while
the position is the integral of the angular speed. Therefore,
defining the acceleration profile in the form of a given torque
profile, feeding this in the variable speed drive, reveals the
final speed of the variable speed drive.
CONCLUSIONS
For vocational training and undergraduate students, a virtual
laboratory can be applied, when the components have the same
look and feel as the real components. The students should be
able to set-up the virtual laboratory experiment, using banana
plugs and multimeters, like the student would do in a physical
laboratory experiment. The models require only nameplate
and rated parameters, but internally, the models are complex
and the required parameters are automatically calculated from
the nameplate and rated values. Non-linearity, saturation and
harmonics, is included in those models. Since animation can
be applied, also the rotation of magnetic fields or the com-
mutation of currents in the machine can be visualized, being
an extra educative quantity compared to a physical laboratory.
For last year undergraduate and graduate students, the more
detailed drive simulations can be applied.
REFERENCES
[1] G. G. Karady, "Roll of laboratory education in electrical power engineer-
ing education," 2008 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting
- Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2008, pp. 1-3, doi: 10.1109/PES.2008.4596141.
[2] R. Belmans and W. Geysen, "Impact of the computer developments
on the education of engineering graduates in electrical machines
and drives," Proceedings. Electrotechnical Conference Integrating Re-
search, Industry and Education in Energy and Communication En-
gineering’„ Lisbon, Portugal, 1989, pp. 728-732, doi: 10.1109/MEL-
CON.1989.50146.
[3] H. A. Smolleck, "Modeling and analysis of the induction machine: a
computational/experimental approach," in IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 482-485, May 1990, doi: 10.1109/59.54556.
[4] F. Flinders, S. Senini and W. Oghanna, "Mixed electrical and mechanical
simulations using dynamic systems analysis packages," Proceedings of
the 1993 IEEE/ASME Joint Railroad Conference, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
1993, pp. 87-93, doi: 10.1109/RRCON.1993.292959.
[5] K. T. Chau and C. C. Chan, "A SPICE compatible model of permanent
magnet DC motor drives," Proceedings of 1995 International Conference
on Power Electronics and Drive Systems. PEDS 95, Singapore, 1995,
pp. 477-482 vol.1, doi: 10.1109/PEDS.1995.404875.
[6] P. Bauer, V. Fedak and O. Rompelman, "PEMCWebLab - Distance
and virtual laboratories in electrical engineering: Development and
trends," 2008 13th International Power Electronics and Motion Control
Conference, EPE-PEMC 2008, Poznan, Poland, 2008, pp. 2354-2359,
doi: 10.1109/EPEPEMC.2008.4635615.
[7] P. Casals-Torrens, "Virtual Laboratory for Learning Asynchronous Mo-
tors in Engineering Degrees," in IEEE Revista Iberoamericana de
Tecnologias del Aprendizaje, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 71-76, May 2013, doi:
10.1109/RITA.2013.2258234.
[8] A. Üzel, D. C. Zuidervliet and P. J. v. Duijsen, "Educational Set-up for
Brushless Motor Drives," 2021 17th Conference on Electrical Machines,
Drives and Power Systems (ELMA), Sofia, Bulgaria, 2021, pp. 1-6, doi:
10.1109/ELMA52514.2021.9503025.
[9] P. J. v. Duijsen and D. C. Zuidervliet, "Teaching Field Oriented Control
using Animation," 2021 17th Conference on Electrical Machines, Drives
and Power Systems (ELMA), Sofia, Bulgaria, 2021, pp. 1-6, doi:
10.1109/ELMA52514.2021.9502966.
[10] Caspoc Simulation and Animation, Simulation Research, [Online] Avail-
able: https://www.caspoc.com,
[11] DC laboratory, The Hague University, TIS, Delft. [Online] Available:
http://dc-lab.org
[12] CDIO Initiative, [Online] Available: www.cdio.org
[13] ETS-Didactic, 3-phase asynchronous motor, [Online] Available:
https://ets-didactic.de/en-gb/home/drehstrom-asynchronmotor-ac3-23-
40v-20w-35004-2078293/


