Title: Challenges of Adoption of Cloud Computing Solutions in Higher Education: Case Study Republic of Kosovo
Authors: L. Shala Riza, J. Ajdari, M. Hamiti
Year: 2023
Conference: CE (Computers in Education)
Priority: MEDIUM - Abstract sufficient

Relevance: Cloud adoption in education - provides context for IaC idea (barriers/challenges)

Abstract:
Cloud Computing has begun to be widely used
in higher education institutions in the last few years. The
transition from on-premises systems to cloud solutions in
education is a smart initiative with its own set of rewards
and obstacles and affects various stakeholders willing to
accept this change. The research tries to highlight the
challenges that could affect the Cloud Computing (CC)
solution in higher education institutions in the Republic of
Kosovo (RKS) as a developing country, regarding security,
infrastructure, and performance. Potential challenges
affecting the implementation of CC in education will be
assessed by different stakeholders, such as students,
academic and IT staff of public and private universities,
who are the target participants of this research. Also, this
paper tries to highlight the level of user awareness of CC
technology, the advantages of this platform, as well as the
willingness of shareholders to apply it in educational
institutions. Expected results foresee the identification of
challenges and benefits that can be encountered in the case
of CC implementation in HEIs, with the case study of the
RKS. The findings of the research can help institutions to
assess the challenges during the integration of a CC solution
in their HEIs.


---
Notes after reading abstract:


---
Decision: [ ] Get full paper  [ ] Abstract sufficient  [ ] Not relevant

---
Full Paper (if decided to get):

Challenges of Adoption of Cloud Computing
Solutions in Higher Education: Case Study
Republic of Kosovo
L. Shala Riza, J. Ajdari and M. Hamiti
South East European University, Faculty of Contemporary Sciences and Technologies, Tetovo, North Macedonia
ls31402@seeu.edu.mk
j.ajdari@seeu.edu.mk
m.hamiti@seeu.edu.mk
Abstract - Cloud Computing has begun to be widely used
in higher education institutions in the last few years. The
transition from on-premises systems to cloud solutions in
education is a smart initiative with its own set of rewards
and obstacles and affects various stakeholders willing to
accept this change. The research tries to highlight the
challenges that could affect the Cloud Computing (CC)
solution in higher education institutions in the Republic of
Kosovo (RKS) as a developing country, regarding security,
infrastructure, and performance. Potential challenges
affecting the implementation of CC in education will be
assessed by different stakeholders, such as students,
academic and IT staff of public and private universities,
who are the target participants of this research. Also, this
paper tries to highlight the level of user awareness of CC
technology, the advantages of this platform, as well as the
willingness of shareholders to apply it in educational
institutions. Expected results foresee the identification of
challenges and benefits that can be encountered in the case
of CC implementation in HEIs, with the case study of the
RKS. The findings of the research can help institutions to
assess the challenges during the integration of a CC solution
in their HEIs.
Keywords - cloud computing; challenges; higher
education; e-Learning; Republic of Kosovo
I. INTRODUCTION
The Republic of Kosovo, as a country emerging from
the war more than 20 years ago, is in its efforts to
consolidate the education system in general, aiming to
adopt effective educational techniques from examples of
developed countries in the region and beyond. With all the
tendency to apply numerous reforms, once again the
education system is encountering various obstacles
starting from the lack of infrastructure to the lack of
sufficient budget for investments in this sector. On the
other hand, the ICT sector has also experienced rapid
development in the Republic of Kosovo since 1999.
Various companies offer qualitative IT services, while
public and private educational institutions in the field of
IT, through certified teaching curricula, offer education
for thousands of Kosovar youths, while the demand for
various trainings is still growing [1].
Cloud computing plays an important role in boosting
the quality of education by providing several benefits such
as low-cost infrastructure, collaboration, scalability, and
simplicity of use. [2]. In recent decades, there has been an
increase in interest in e-learning, particularly among
students enrolled in higher education. As stated in [3], “It
is very important for governments to invest in high-
quality universities and provide them the access to the
most effective learning tools such as high standard IT
infrastructure which can be used for educational software
or easy data sharing within the classroom.” Actually,
today’s students are continually connected to the internet
through various programs such as Gmail, Google Class-
room, Facebook, and Twitter, therefore they are a part of
the cloud infrastructure. As a result, HEIs administrators
are keen to embrace CC techniques, driving the trend of
growing CC adoption in the higher education sector [4].
There are numerous papers and publications regarding
cloud computing, but it is a need for continuous research
work in this field in the sense of identifying and
evaluating the prominent factors adopting CC
implementation in HEIs. The purpose of this research
work is to highlight numerous barriers or challenges that
may influence CC implementation in the public and
private universities of the Republic of Kosovo.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. The Concept of Cloud Computing
Though there is not a certain definition that has been
accepted universally for cloud computing technology, in
the literature we can find several interpretations and
approaches that tend to elaborate on this concept. As
stated in [5], “Cloud computing is the model for managing
the effective access to the shared number of configurable
resources like servers, network, application, and storage. It
can minimize the management effort and the interaction of
service providers. Cloud computing is used to minimize
the IT infrastructure costs and maintenance”. There are
several service delivery and deployment models of CCT.
The above-mentioned resources can be shared over the
internet effortlessly. CCT has three types of services,
infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform as a service
(PaaS), and software as a service (SaaS). Through SaaS,
the end users need only an interface to access needed
information such as Gmail or Dropbox while the other
architecture resources are hidden from the consumer.
Through IaaS, users can deploy and execute software
(such as Amazon Web Services or Microsoft Azure)
MIPRO 2023/CE 669
through the provision of computing resources. Lastly,
PaaS provides a platform for end users to design, modify,
and deploy applications utilizing libraries or languages
established earlier by cloud providers.
There are four types of cloud deployment models:
private, public, hybrid, and community. The private model
is often utilized only within an organization, institution, or
firm, and it is used when a higher level of safety is sought
and critical for the organization. The most well- known
cloud is the public cloud, which is administered by service
providers such as Amazon, Google Drive, and Microsoft
One Drive. The hybrid cloud model is a mixture of two or
more patterns that is often used to maximize the benefits
of each model combined. The community models are
mostly employed by organizations whose infrastructure is
hosted by a third party or another organization that is a
member of the community [6].
B. Cloud Computing integration in Higher Educational
Institutions
Cloud computing technology is already being used at
higher education institutions in various industrialized
countries throughout the world, including the United
States, Japan, and Europe. The cloud-based program
Google Educator, as well as the Google suite for
education - GAFE, are probably one of the most essential
applications that Cloud computing provides. Students and
instructors may improve cooperation and productivity by
having access to their data anywhere, at any time, with
these tools. On the other hand, there are also many cloud-
based platforms developed for teachers such as Microsoft
Office 365, iGoogle, Book Search, News, Google Note-
book, etc. [7].
According to the proposed model in Fig. 1, the
university’s system, and application within the hybrid
cloud, has been divided into two parts: Private Cloud
which is more secure and has on-premises servers and
includes SIS, PMS, and UMS. The second part is Public
Cloud where are hosted the less sensitive data and
includes LMS, Video on Demand, VCR, and Mailing
Systems. This model takes advantage of the hybrid cloud
to achieve speed, security, and availability and it also
reduces the burden of IT sectors by moving apps to the
public cloud. As seen, it’s a flexible model since it allows
educational systems to balance internal/external loads
based on the organizational needs or technical
requirements [8] Despite the fact that developing nations
have inadequate infrastructure, there is an increasing need
to compare current e-learning approaches to conventional
ones by utilizing cloud services. This technical method
may host Learning Management Systems and other
university resources, although the hybrid model, in which
the university’s systems are spread between the private
cloud on-premises and the public cloud, is viewed as the
most ideal model for CC implementation [9].
According to [10], organizational capabilities are the
key factors for adopting ICT in developing countries. This
survey proposed a model to assess the real likelihood of
CC or last technology adoption which allows
organizations to make appropriate decisions. Service
providers can implement this facility as a web-based DSS
(Decision Support System) tool in order to measure
customers’ readiness, thus organizations can avoid
unsuccessful adoption.
C. Key challenges and benefits when adopting Cloud
Computing Technology in Higher Educational
Institutions experiences from other countries
In the publication of [11], is found that factors such as
reliability, relative advantage, security, compatibility,
technology readiness, regulatory, top management
support, policy, and competitive pressure have positive
impacts on cloud computing adoption while tribalism
culture has a negative impact. The paper of [12],
highlights the key benefits and barriers to cloud
computing adoption. According to this study, the main
benefits of CCT adoption include greater operational
efficiency, cost savings, simplicity of application
deployment, flexibility, personnel redeployment, and
sustainability, whereas key hurdles include security,
availability, performance, and trust difficulties.
Further, the study of [13], identified two important
fac- tors that were decision-making in adopting cloud
solutions in the Philippines, such as internet access speed
and lack of knowledge of cloud technologies. In order to
overcome the aforementioned barriers, the study
recommends that universities host training courses or
workshops for aca- demic or IT staff. Similarly as in the
above papers, in [14], authors recommend a model for
adopting CC from HEIs in developing countries which
consisted of five steps: Knowledge (increased awareness
of CC technology), Per- suasion (find the key benefits of
the solution aimed), Decision (adopt or reject the
technology), Implementation (is proceeded in case of
acceptance decision on the previous step) and
Confirmation (continue using the solution for long term
period).
In their research work, [14] proposed DOI theory to
help organizations in accepting or rejecting innovations.
They recommend a model for adopting CC from HEIs in
developing countries which consisted of five steps:
Knowledge (increased awareness of benefits and
limitation of CC technology), Persuasion (find the key
benefits of the solution aimed), Decision (this step may
lead to adoption or rejection of the technology),
Implementation (is proceeded in case of acceptance
decision on the previous
Figure 1. Cloud Computing proposed model [8]
670 MIPRO 2023/CE
Figure 2. Innovation–decisions process model [14]
step) and Confirmation (continue using the solution for
long term period).
Another study conducted in Jordan, scrutinized the
main factors affecting CC adoption in HEIs of this
country. Based on the findings, the following key
elements were identified: cost savings, disaster recovery,
scalability, compatibility, knowledge exchange, ICT
utilization level, and HEIs size. The study also provided
an implementation structure with four stages of CC
adoption: CCT awareness, persuasion phase, decision
phase, and implementation phase [15].
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this study was to identify the main
challenges that affect the adoption of cloud technology in
higher education institutions in the Republic of Kosovo.
The data were collected from secondary sources from
different publications on the internet, later the variables
were identified based on which the questionnaire was
designed for the purpose of collecting primary data. Three
phases were engaged in the questionnaire adaption. (1)
First, the questionnaire instrument was translated from
Albanian (source language) to English (target language),
(2) the data acquired from respondents was administered
and structured, and (3) the data was processed and
analyzed graphically using Excel and the SPSS software.
[16] The Google Forms questionnaire is built on the
principle of confidentiality and includes both multiple-
choice questions and questions with a 5-point Likert scale.
To select the sample, we used convenience sampling
methods in order to target the desired subjects. The
targeted respondents are students or graduates, IT staff,
and academic staff of public and private universities of the
Republic of Kosovo. The total number of respondents that
participated in the survey is 57, of which 21 are
students/graduates, 13 are IT staff, and 23 belong to the
academic community who actually work in either public
or private universities. Because this study is descriptive in
nature, we examined the data acquired from the research
work using the quantitative approach and the Microsoft
Excel application program.
A. Research questions
Based on the data collected systematically from the
literature review, we could identify the independent
variables such as security, privacy, lack of proper
infrastructure, service provider support, reliability, and
skills of IT personnel, management, performance, the
price for accessing resources, internet speed, lack of
electricity and institutional support. On the other hand,
cloud computing adoption in HEIs in the RKS is
considered a dependent variable. Thus, the research
questions are:
R1: What are the most significant challenges that
would affect cloud computing adoption in HEIs of
RKS?
R2: What are considered to be the key benefits when
adopting Cloud technology in higher education
institutions in RKS?
B. Data analysis
1) Questionnaire data analysis: For data collection,
we used a Google Forms questionnaire distributed online.
The questionnaire targeted academic staff, IT staff as well
as students or graduates from public and private
universities of the Republic of Kosovo. This online
questionnaire contains nine closed questions. In total, 57
respondents answered where the gender distribution of the
respondents is almost equal between the two genders
(51% female and 49% male). From Fig. 3, we can see that
from the total number of participants, 23 are academic
staff, 21 students or graduates and 13 are IT staff. From
both public and private universities of RKS. From this
total number, 40.4% have studied or are currently part of a
private university, while 59.6% of respondents have
chosen a public university as their institution. In
embracing new technology, we assumed that the level of
knowledge we have about that technology and awareness
about the benefits it offers also play a significant role.
Figure 3. Respondents profiles
When asked about their knowledge of the Cloud
Computing solution, 28% of the sample responded they
are very well informed, while 17.5% confirmed they know
only a little aware about this platform. The results of this
question are visually illustrated in Fig. 4. As is shown in
the graph presented in Fig. 5, in the question on the
benefits of CC solution when used in HEIs, 43
respondents of which 22 were from public universities and
21 from private ones responded that they are aware of the
benefits. Further, 9 of the participants answered with
“Somehow”, 4 answered they are not aware of CC
benefits and only one respondent chose the “I have no
answer” option.
MIPRO 2023/CE 671
Further, when asked if the lack of knowledge about
Cloud Computing has an impact on the adoption of this
solution in higher education institutions, most of the
respondents agreed upon this fact, of which 17 were
academic staff, 12 were IT staff and 18 were students or
graduates (refer to Fig. 6).
Figure 4. Respondents awareness over Cloud Computing
A smaller number of participants stated that the lack of
knowledge or awareness would impact “Somehow” or has
no impact on the adoption of this technology. The
question results are shown in Fig. 6.
Figure 5. Respondents awareness of the benefits of using CC in HEIs
In terms of ethical standards, the respondents were
informed about the goal and rationality of the
questionnaire, as well as the destination of the gathered
findings, throughout the study process, respectively during
data collection via the online form. Respondent data is
kept anonymous, and the obtained information is utilized
Figure 6. Respondents’ thoughts over the of lack of knowledge
impact of CC on the adoption of this technology in HEIs for academic reasons.
2) One-Sample Test: One-Sample T-test is used to
test the relationship between independent variables
(security, privacy, reliability, SP support, lack of proper
infrastructure for integration, IT skills and knowledge,
management, performance, price for accessing resources,
internet speed, lack of electricity, institutional support) on
the dependent variable (Cloud Computing adoption in
HEIs).
From the output results in the Sig. (2-tailed) column in
Figure 6, we can see that p-value is < .05. Also, the
findings indicate that these variables are all accepted as
the mean value is (>0.3) and the standard deviation is (>
0.7). This indicates that the above-mentioned independent
TABLE I. ONE-SAMPLE TEST ON KEY FACTORS AFFECTING
CLOUD COMPUTING ADOPTION IN HEIS
Test Value = 0
t df Sig.(2-
tailed)
Mean
Diff.
95% Conf. Interval of
the Diff.
Lower Upper
Security Privacy Reliability SP support Lack of infrast. IT skills Management Performance Price for
resource
Internet speed Institutional
support
Lack of
electricity
26.63 56 .000 4.00 25.42 56 .000 3.82 27.91 56 .000 3.98 24.84 22.94 30.36 27.02 21.82 29.77 23.43 32.26 24.03 56 .000 3.71 56 .000 3.68 56 .000 4.05 56 .000 3.73 56 .000 3.54 56 .000 3.87 56 .000 3.78 56 .000 4.03 56 .000 3.84 3.69 3.52 3.69 3.41 3.36 3.78 3.46 3.21 3.61 3.46 3.78 3.52 4.30
4.12
4.26
4.01
4.00
4.32
4.01
3.86
4.13
4.11
4.28
4.16
variables have a significant impact on CC adoption in
HEIs in the Republic of Kosova. At the same time, we
answered the first research question: R1: What are the
most significant challenges that would affect CC
adoption in HEIs of RKS?
Consequently, we can conclude that all above
mentioned independent variables such as security,
privacy, reliability, Service Provider support, lack of
proper infrastructure for integration, IT skills and
knowledge, management, performance, the price for
accessing resources, internet speed, institutional support
and lack of electricity are key factors or challenges
affecting Cloud Computing adoption in public and private
universities in the Republic of Kosovo.
3) Cronbach’s Alpha and KMO and Bartlett’s Test:
Since the questions are Likert-scale type, it is worth
measuring the reliability and consistency of the answers,
this way we make sure the set of the questions raised
measure the same objective. We checked reliability
statistics against twelve independent variables and in our
case Cronbach’s Alpha value is .891.
Usually, this value should be between 0 and 1 so the
higher the value of Cronbach’s Alpha, the more
confidence we have that the questions are internally
MIPRO 2023/CE
consistent and correlate to each other. The value we
gained (.891) is close to one so we can conclude that the
reliability level is high.
TABLE II. CRONBACH’S ALPHA TABLE
Cronbach’s Alpha N of Items
.891 12
In order to measure the sampling adequacy and to
examine how the factors explain each other, a KMO test is
conducted. The table below presents two different tests:
the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) Measure of Sampling
Adequacy and Bartlett’s test of Sphericity which are used
to measure whether the variables are correlated and also
the sampling adequacy.
The accepted value for the KMO index is between 0.5
and 1. In our case, the KMO index is .772 which indicates
that factor analysis is appropriate. A KMO value more
than 0.5 and a significance level for the Bartlett's test less
than 0.05, as in our case, indicate that there is significant
correlation in the data. The degree to which a single
variable is associated with other variables is shown by
variable collinearity.
TABLE III. KMO AND BARTLETT’S TEST
KMO Measure of Sampling
Adequacy
Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity way, we have also answered the second research
question: R2: What do you consider to be the key
benefits when adopting Cloud technology in higher
education institutions in RKS?
Some of the key benefits are the availability of
resources, better data management, modernization of the
way of studying, the widest range of online resources,
better cooperation, and the use of green technology.
.772
Approx. Chi-Square 410.171
df 66
Sig. .000
4) Rotated Component Matrix: To find the correlations
between items and components or factors, the rotated
com- ponent matrix was used. This matrix helps to
determine what each of the components means. Small
coefficients below .5 were suppressed in order to offer a
clearer view of the group factors. The first component has
a strong correlation with the lack of proper infrastructure,
IT skills and knowledge, internet speed, lack of electricity
and institutional support. The second component has a
correlation with security, privacy, and reliability, while the
third component has a correlation with IT skills and
knowledge, management, performance, the price for
accessing resources, and internet speed.
5) Key benefits of adopting Cloud Computing in HEIs:
In the continuation of data collection, the respondents
stated there are several benefits of adopting Cloud
Computing technology in higher education in the RKS. In
this
TABLE IV. CORRELATIONS BETWEEN ITEMS AND COMPONENTS
Component
1 2 3
Security
.866
Privacy
.876
Reliability
.847
SP support
.729
Lack of proper infrastructure
.550
IT skills and knowledge
.581
Management
.556
Performance
.786
Price for accessing resources
.862
Internet speed
.523
.526
Lack of electricity
.855
Institutional support
.813
Figure 7. Key benefits of adopting CC in HEIs
Lastly, considering the advantages, benefits, and
challenges of the implementation of this technology, 93%
of the respondents answered that they are in favor of the
integration of Cloud Computing technology in higher
education in the Republic of Kosovo, while 7% stated that
they have no answer.
C. Conclusions
With all of the investments in the country’s technology
industry, it should be emphasized that there is still room to
be enlightened about Cloud Computing solution, including
the benefits it delivers as well as the possible obstacles we
may face throughout the implementation process. The
goal of this study paper was to identify the important
elements or significant challenges that impact Cloud
Computing adoption in higher education institutions in the
Republic of Kosovo. From the data analysis, it was
concluded that all twelve independent variables such as
security, privacy, reliability, Service Provider support,
lack of proper infrastructure for integration, IT skills and
knowledge, management, performance, the price for
accessing resources, internet speed, institutional support,
and lack of electricity are the key factors or challenges
affecting CC adoption in public and private universities in
the Republic of Kosovo. This research work aspires to
guide and serve as a reference point for educational
institutions and other actors in the process of analyzing
and examining the circumstances for the adoption of
Cloud technology in educational institutions in the
Republic of Kosovo as a study case. HEIs in the country
as well as the different stakeholders involved in this sector
should consider the above-mentioned aspects in order to
implement cloud technology in these institutions. In the
future, more research work can be done in the context of
increasing the targeted sample and expanding the field of
study.
MIPRO 2023/CE 673
REFERENCES
[1] L. Aliu, “Analizë e sistemit arsimor në Kosovë,” 2019.
[2] K. H. A. Al-Shqeerat, F. M. A. Al-Shrouf, M. R. Hassan,
and H. Fajraoui, “Cloud computing security challenges in higher
educational institutions - a survey,” International Journal of
Computer Applications, vol. 161, no. 6, pp. 22–29, Mar 2017.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.ijcaonline.org/archives/volume161/ number6/27154-
2017913217
[3] C. Bulla, B. Hunshal, and S. Mehta, “Adoption of cloud
computing in education system: A survey,” international journal
of engineer- ing science and computing, vol. 6, p. 6375, 07
2016.
[4] A. Elgelany and W. G. Alghabban, “Cloud computing: Empirical
studies in higher education a literature review,” International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 8,
no. 10, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.14569/
IJACSA.2017.081017
[5] R. Parveen, “Challenges in cloud computing adoption- an
empirical study of educational sectors of saudi arabia,”
International Journal of Managing Information Technology, vol.
11, pp. 1–11, 2018.
[6] Y. A. M. Qasem, S. Asadi, R. Abdullah, Y. Yah, R. Atan, M. A.
Al-Sharafi, and A. A. Yassin, “A multi-analytical approach to
predict the determinants of cloud computing adoption in higher
education institutions,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 14, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
3417/10/14/4905
[7] A. Shahzad, A. G. Golamdin, and N. A. Ismail, “Opportunity
and challenges using the cloud computing in the case of
malaysian higher education institutions,” The International
Journal of Management Science and Information Technology
(IJMSIT), no. 20, pp. 1–18, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://hdl.handle.net/ 10419/178822
[8] M. Ibrahim and M. Elmasry, “Cloud computing for e-learning:
A proposed model for higher education institutions in developing
countries,” International Journal of Scientific Technology
Research, vol. 10, pp. 408–416, 03 2021.
[9] R. Manoharan, “A systematic review of cloud security
challenges in higher education,” The Online Journal of Distance
Education and e-Learning, vol. 5, pp. 1–10, 10 2017.
[10] M. Workineh, N. M. Garcia, and D. Midekso, “Cloud computing
as technological solutions for higher education institutions:
Adoption readiness assessment model: Reseach in-progress,” in
2017 Inter- national Conference on Computing Networking and
Informatics (ICCNI), 2017, pp. 1–
[11] A. Hussein Alghushami, N. H. Zakaria, and Z. Mat Aji,
“Factors influencing cloud computing adoption in higher
education institutions of least developed countries: Evidence
from republic of yemen,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 22, 2020.
[Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/22/8098
[12] V. Arkorful, “Cloud computing adoption in higher education: A
comparative study between public and private universities in sub
saharan africa,” Library Philosophy and Practice (e-journal),
2019.
[13] C. Alimboyong and M. Bucjan, “Cloud computing adoption
among state universities and colleges in the philippines: Issues and
chal- lenges,” International Journal of Evaluation and Research
in Edu- cation (IJERE), vol. 10, p. 1455, 12 2021.
[14] M. Odeh, A. Garcia-Perez, and K. Warwick, “Cloud computing
adoption at higher education institutions in developing
countries: A qualitative investigation of main enablers and
barriers,” Interna- tional Journal of Information and Education
Technology, vol. 7, pp. 921–927, 01 2017.
[15] M. Odeh, “A novel framework for the adoption of cloud
computing in the higher education sector in developing
countries,” 12 2020.
[16] E. Bahçivan and S. Kapucu, "Adaptation of conceptions of
learning science questionnaire into Turkish and science
teacher candidates’ conceptions of learning science,"
European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education,
vol. II, pp. 106-118, 2014.


