Title: Cloud Based Laboratory for Distance Education
Authors: S. Ristov, M. Gusev, A. Donevski
Year: 2013
Conference: CE (Computers in Education)
Priority: HIGH - Must examine

Relevance: Lab infrastructure setup, relevant for IaC Progressive Learning idea

Abstract:
Today's dynamic life has changed the traditional teaching from the classroom and laboratory based classical learning to an approach using online and distance e-Learning. Universities usually follow this trend and enable their resources as online utilities for the students. There are several ways to offer these facilities online and cloud is the most promising one when analyzing several criteria. The cloud technology provides many benefits reducing the overall cost and improving the business continuity. In this paper we present an idea how to transfer the traditional computer laboratory into a cloud based utility using open source cloud frameworks. This transformation creates a dynamic, flexible, elastic, reliable and modern laboratory that can serve the students as a tool for distance learning for many courses simultaneously. It acts on a “Lab as a Service” principle.


---
Notes after reading abstract:


---
Decision: [ ] Get full paper  [ ] Abstract sufficient  [ ] Not relevant



Cloud Based Laboratory for Distance Education
Sasko Ristov, Marjan Gusev and Aleksandar Donevski
Ss. Cyril and Methodius University,
Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering,
Skopje, Macedonia
Email: {sashko.ristov, marjan.gushev}@finki.ukim.mk, aleksandar.donevski@outlook.com
Abstract—Today’s dynamic life has changed the traditional
teaching from the classroom and laboratory based classical
learning to an approach using online and distance e-Learning.
Universities usually follow this trend and enable their resources
as online utilities for the students. There are several ways to offer
these facilities online and cloud is the most promising one when
analyzing several criteria. The cloud technology provides many
benefits reducing the overall cost and improving the business
continuity. In this paper we present an idea how to transfer the
traditional computer laboratory into a cloud based utility using
open source cloud frameworks. This transformation creates a
dynamic, flexible, elastic, reliable and modern laboratory that
can serve the students as a tool for distance learning for many
courses simultaneously. It acts on a ”Lab as a Service” principle.
Index Terms—Education, Cloud Computing, Online laboratory
I. INTRODUCTION
Universities are faced with a huge problem when they
design their data centers and laboratories. The hardware equip-
ment’s life-cycle is usually three to five years and the managers
must be smart enough to choose appropriate hardware, that
is, to choose the most powerful equipment within a given
limited budget. However, the experience shows that most of
the time the resources will be either over-utilized (for example,
during assignment deadlines, assessments or enrollments), or
underutilized (during holidays or weekends).
Another problem, which maybe the worst, is to choose
a sufficient and appropriate laboratory equipment. That is,
different courses require equipment with specific technical
characteristics. For example, multimedia-based courses require
computing power and available storage space, parallel pro-
gramming and algorithms need multi-core CPUs and a lot
of RAM memory, while some courses demand only a high-
bandwidth Internet connection, regardless of the equipment’s
power.
Apart of the hardware equipment, the various courses re-
quire different system and application software. A diversity of
operating systems limit the use of learning tools, some might
need Unix or Linux, while others Windows or Mac operating
systems. Even more, 16-bit programs are not supported, and
many 32 bit programs do not work properly on 64 bit operating
systems since they run in an emulator [1]. Another problem
arises when installing a program for one course damages
already installed programs for other courses. There are file
version conflicts, registry value conflicts, and their unnecessary
duplication.
University laboratories are deployed to allow the students
to learn the material more practically. However, there are
many part-time students, which are part-time employed and
cannot attend the hands-on laboratory in specific hours. They
demand a distance learning environment available 24h per day.
European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS)
on the other hand, gives a recommendation to the universities
to evaluate the students’ homework assignments and projects,
which usually are developed at home, and the regular students
also need some distance learning environment.
A possible solution for all these challenges is to use
the emerging technologies, such as virtualization and cloud
computing. Virtualization allows a creation of separated virtual
machine images for each course and instantiating arbitrary
number of active instances with customized virtualized hard-
ware resources (CPU, RAM, I/O, HDD). By using the cloud
computing paradigm, the universities can either build their
own private clouds in their data centers, or rent resources
from some commercial public cloud service provider, or both.
A para-virtual laboratory can even improve the students’
performance [2].
Our idea is to realize the laboratory based on a service
principle offered by the cloud technology. In this paper, we
present an idea how to develop a cloud based laboratory for
distance learning by using the emerging techniques without or
with a little additional cost. This online laboratory acting as
a service is intended to be used by the arbitrary number of
students of several courses simultaneously, 24 hours per day,
7 days in a week, instead of university working hours only.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work in the area of distance education
based on cloud. In Section III, we describe the architecture
of our cloud based laboratory for distance learning. The
usage of the laboratory is presented in Section IV. Section V
discusses about further development of the laboratory for
distance learning and self assessment, apart of classical online
laboratory. Finally, we conclude our work and present our
plans for future work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
This section presents the state of the art in the area of
distance learning, especially the cloud based.
Many online courses exist that offer distance learning.
Udacity offers free and chargeable online courses, which
834 MIPRO 2014/CE
Faculty
Network Online Cloud based Laboratory
Internet
Fig. 1. The online laboratory equipment
EU Controller EU Controller
OS Controller OS Controller
can be started at arbitrary time [3]. Putting the Stanford’s
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence course online, Thrun got
an enrollment of 160,000 students from all over the world
[4]. StarHPC [5] (the Software Tools for Academics and
Researchers) is one of the first projects where the cloud is used
in distance learning, which ”brings” arbitrary Amazon’s EC2
(Elastic Computing Cloud) resources into the students’ labo-
ratory. StarCluster [6] is a similar project where the students
can create a cluster computing environment in the cloud for
parallel and distributed computing applications and systems.
For more than 10 years, Cisco has a learning environment,
which is migrated on the cloud [7].
Platform as a Service (PaaS) cloud service layer can be
also useful in education, since it allows the students to focus
in the tasks, rather than on spending a lot of time to set up the
necessary software for course activities [8]. Tian’s framework
[9] manages PaaS in a virtual cloud laboratory and manages
the users, resources and their access rights. Yin et al. [10]
built a multimedia courseware sharing platform, which is based
on Google App Engine. NVLab is another tool, which uses
virtualization. It is a web-based laboratory for management of
network designs [11].
Gusev et al. [12] developed an e-Learning and bench-
marking platform for distance learning of the Parallel and
Distributed Processing course. They proposed a cloud model
for the platform, as well as [13]. Bastidas [14] proposed
the implementation of the computer networking laboratory
infrastructure to distance students in order to extend the
learning.
III. THE ONLINE LABORATORY ARCHITECTURE
In this section we present our model of a distance learning
lab working as a service on a cloud. The architecture consists
of two open source cloud frameworks, which are dedicated
with arbitrary number of physical cloud server nodes.
A. The Physical Equipment
The laboratory is based of the existing 20 workstations,
one router and one switch, as depicted in Figure III-A. All
workstations are grouped in several VLANs connected by a
switch. A router is used to enable an access to the university
internal network.
Cloud Node Cloud Node
Cloud Node Cloud Node Cloud Node Cloud Node B. The Architecture
We have a lot of experience during the last several years
with various open source cloud frameworks, such as Open-
Stack, Eucalyptus, OpenNebula and CloudStack. Realizing
various cloud deployments we have faced several challenges,
such as Java incompatibility with applications in the cloud,
or interaction with the cloud interfaces. Therefore, our rec-
ommendation is to implement two cloud frameworks, i.e.,
OpenStack and Eucalyptus, as most appropriate to deploy our
online laboratory. This provides a sufficient redundancy, as
well as extension for research options.
Figure III-B depicts the architecture of this online laboratory
offered as a service. Two workstations are used as Eucalyptus
Fig. 2. The online laboratory architecture
cloud and cluster controllers, and one workstation for Open-
Stack. All others are used as cloud node controllers.
In normal mode, the Eucalyptus cloud uses all other work-
station to instantiate virtual machines, while all OpenStack’s
services are disabled. When necessary, the OpenStack’s ser-
vices will be enabled, while the Eucalyptus’ services will be
disabled on several cloud nodes.
Cloud Node Cloud Node
MIPRO 2014/CE 835
Faculty
Network Online Cloud based Laboratory
Online
Researcher
Traditional
Student
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM4
Online
Student
Traditional
Researcher
Fig. 3. The usage scenario
Update of the image is conducted each semester, which
limits the flexibility of the traditional laboratories. Therefore,
we migrated one laboratory in the cloud to become a distance
learning laboratory. We developed several images, each for
a particular course. For example, the Computer Networks
image is Windows based, which contains Cisco’s learning
materials, several network tools and simulators, etc, while
the image for the High Performance Computing course is
Linux based, which contains C++ compiler, OpenMP, MPI
and BLAS libraries.
Since most of the regular students are at the faculty and
work on the host operating systems, while the other busy
students are at work, the laboratory is used mostly as a tradi-
tional physical laboratory in the working hours. Just in case,
the administrator can limit the number of available virtualized
resources through the cloud according to the requirements of
the laboratory exercises of the current course. For example,
if the current course requires two CPUs of four core cloud
server nodes, the administrator can limit the cloud scheduler
to instantiate virtual machine instances with maximum two
CPU cores per physical server.
C. Using as a Research Laboratory
Additionally, apart of the already prepared customized vir-
tual machine images for several courses, we prepared ”blank”
virtual machines for the master and PhD students to realize
research, or for the undergraduate students to realize a team-
oriented project. These virtual machines are allowed to interact
with the cloud controllers in order to develop the elastic and
scalable applications as a service on the top of the cloud,
according to the model for e-Assessment cloud solutions [16].
IV. FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION
This section describes the usage of our deployed cloud
based online laboratory realized as a service. Figure IV depicts
its three main purposes:
• Traditional Physical Laboratory opened for the students
only in working hours;
• Distance Learning Laboratory available for the students
24/7/365; and
• Research laboratory [15], available both for the students
and researchers.
A. Using as a Traditional Physical Laboratory
Since each workstation is installed with Linux with GUI
(Graphical User Interface), the whole laboratory can be used as
a traditional physical laboratory in the faculty’s working hours.
The students use the host operating system for those courses
that require Linux operating system, while they can still run
the virtual machine instance of the cloud for a particular course
that requires Windows based applications.
B. Using as a Distance Learning Laboratory
Our currently prepared image with Windows operating
system has 124 installed applications, which includes several
IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) for various pro-
gramming languages, simulators, network and database tools,
etc. Each of the laboratory workstations is installed from this
image. Although this is a huge list of installed applications,
it is only a Windows platform, and something else is always
missing, such as some plug-in or some configuration file is
changed by other application.
V. DISCUSSION
This section discusses details of current and further lab
development to realize the overall goal as a distance education
lab providing its resources as a service to the students, teachers
and researchers. The benefits of migrating the traditional
laboratories in the cloud are elaborated along with description
of possible challenges.
A. The Benefits
The university can achieve many benefits if it migrates some
or all of its laboratories in the cloud and offer it on a service
based approach. In this section we present the most important
ones.
1) Isolated Course Applications: The online laboratory is
used for several courses: Computer Networks, High Perfor-
mance Computing, Parallel Programming, Teamwork, Com-
puter Network Design, Microprocessor Systems, etc. Each
virtual machine instance is independent of others and works
isolated when it is instantiated. This improves the performance
of the guest operating system because it has less system files,
rather than our image with 124 installed programs.
836 MIPRO 2014/CE
2) Balanced Load of the Equipment: Since different
courses require various hardware resources and cloud based
online laboratory allows the students to work in the arbitrary
time, the utilization of the laboratory equipment will be
balanced instead of either over-utilized or underutilized. Even
more, the laboratory can serve much more online students
rather than a maximum of 20 if it is used as traditional
laboratory only. That is, usually less than a maximum of 20
students are enrolled in the exercises, and not all of them
attend all exercises.
3) Reducing the Cost: Migrating the laboratory in the cloud
can reduce the costs in several ways.
E-Learning should be developed towards open access to
learning, open source software, open standards, and OER [18].
The additional software that our pilot cloud based laboratory
uses is open source, that is, OpenStack and Eucalyptus.
Although the expert’s assistance is required to setup a fully
operational, open source workbench [19], the cost for man
hours for the initial efforts for installing and configuring
the clouds is much smaller than the cost for formating and
configuring each computer at the beginning of each semester,
and the administering during the semester (viruses, no storage
place, deleted files, etc).
The reduced number of students in the laboratory will
also reduce the cost for laboratory maintenance. The cost
for electricity can be reduced because all physical machines
(except the cloud controllers) can be started or deactivated
dynamically, according to the students requirements.
B. Further Challenges
Despite the benefits, there are additional challenges for the
online cloud based laboratory, such as security or availability.
All cloud based environments are more exposed than be-
ing on-premise due to virtualization and multi-tenancy [20].
However, the student exercises’ data are less sensitive.
Another challenge is the laboratory availability. That is,
the laboratory room is neither dedicated for mission critical
services, nor its room has sophisticated climate and redundant
power supply. Still, our design with two clouds and many
server nodes offer good availability.
Maybe the most important challenge is the usage of the
online laboratory for hardware based courses, which requires
working on real equipment, rather than on simulators. How-
ever, the remote engineering is a new trend to share the lab
equipment, which will allow the students with more time for
learning, instead of traveling to the University [21].
C. Further Extensions and Improvements
Our pilot project is a huge step forward, both for the
university and the students. However, we are not going to
stop at this level, instead we are going to further improve
and enhance our cloud based online laboratory. Our intention
is to develop the laboratory not only for distance learning, but
more wider, that is, for distance education.
Applying formative assessment in learning environments
increase the benefits [22], [23]. The learning outcomes of
students can be improved in a mobile learning environment
[24].
Recently, we have developed a scalable and elastic cloud
solution for e-Assessment based on OpenStack cloud frame-
work [17] and E-Assessment system with interactive images
[25]. Both of them will be hosted in our cloud based online
laboratory in order to allow the students to learn through e-
Testing. The following sections briefly describe them.
1) Scalable and Elastic e-Assessment Cloud Solution: The
e-Assessment cloud system is deployed on OpenStack cloud,
which allows to dynamically instantiate and deactivate the
virtual machine instances. Figure 4 presents its architecture.
The implementation creates an instance of already prepared
virtual machine for assessment with particular size according
to the number of assessed students, which is deactivated after
the assessment is finished.
2) E-Assessment System with Interactive Images: This sys-
tem uses sophisticated technologies for interactive images,
such as Google Maps Engine. Interactive image technology
offers a web based environment where the images are sent
to the students. After loading the image, the students can
navigate and zoom to an appropriate level to analyze the image
details. The students answer by setting up one or more marks
on some regions of the image. This system enriches the e-
Assessment environment, enables more correct evaluation and
prevents several methods of cheating and unfair grading.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents the architecture and the usage of the
multi purpose cloud based distance education laboratory. It is
deployed by migrating the existing traditional laboratory in
the cloud by using the open source cloud frameworks. It is
offered as a service free of charge for enrolled students and
University researchers that demand more hardware resources.
It acts as an extended Platform as a Service, since it offers
more than standard platforms the conventional cloud providers
offer. It is not a fully Software as a Service offer for the
students, since it offers a limited set of software tools and
hardware in comparison to the full software the conventional
cloud providers offer. Finally, the students are expected to
develop the final application code or realize experiments with
the available tools and hardware.
The laboratory can be used in three manners. The students
still can work on-site when they have hands on exercises,
such as hardware based courses, which require working on
equipment. Apart of being the traditional on-site laboratory,
it allows the students to work remotely from home whenever
they can and want, for each course. Finally, it is also used by
the young researchers, such as master or PhD students.
The usage of the laboratory can be also extended in distance
education, that is, it can host faculty’s online learning and
online self assessment systems. We will migrate our interactive
e-Assessment and e-Learning systems in the laboratory in
order to make them scalable and elastic capable to handle
arbitrary number of assessed students.
MIPRO 2014/CE 837
Cloud Management
Cloud Resource Pool
Assessment Node
Assessment Node
Dynamic
Resources
Student
.
.
.
Student
OpenStack CC
Student Group 1
WA+DB segment 1
WA+DB segment N
Management Module
Reporting Module
Static
Resources
Student
Student
WA+DB
WA+DB
Student Group N
Proffesor
Fig. 4. e-Assessment cloud system [17]
Fig. 5. An example of a MGC question for e-Assessment system with interactive images [25]
Our pilot laboratory will be extended and improved in
several directions. We will develop and implement virtual
machine images for more courses and we will test the per-
formance of the increased number of the users. Also, we
are challenged to integrate several distributed laboratories on
several locations into one huge virtual online laboratory for
distance education.
838 MIPRO 2014/CE
REFERENCES
[1] Microsoft, “Running 32-bit Applications,” [retrieved: Jan,
2014]. [Online]. Available: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
aa384249(v=vs.85).aspx
[2] M. Anisetti, V. Bellandi, A. Colombo, M. Cremonini, E. Damiani,
F. Frati, J. Hounsou, and D. Rebeccani, “Learning computer networking
on open paravirtual laboratories,” Education, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 302–311, 2007.
[3] Udacity, “Courses,” [retrieved: Jan, 2014]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.udacity.com/
[4] F. Salmon, “Udacity and the future of online universities,” 23 Jan. 2012.
[5] C. Ivica, J. Riley, and C. Shubert, “StarHPC: Teaching parallel pro-
gramming within elastic compute cloud,” in Information Technology
Interfaces, 2009. ITI ’09. Proceedings of the ITI 2009 31st International
Conference on, 2009, pp. 353–356.
[6] MIT, “StarCluster,” [retrieved: Nov, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://star.mit.edu/cluster/
[7] CISCO, “Cisco networking academy,” [retrieved: Nov, 2013]. [Online].
Available: https://cisco.netacad.com/
[8] L. Vaquero, “Educloud: Paas versus iaas cloud usage for an advanced
computer science course,” Education, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54,
no. 4, pp. 590–598, 2011.
[9] W. Tian, S. Su, and G. Lu, “A framework for implementing and
managing platform as a service in a virtual cloud computing lab,” in
Education Technology and Computer Science (ETCS), 2010 Second
International Workshop on, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 273–276.
[10] H. Yin, J. Han, J. Liu, and X. Hongyun, “Development and research
of multimedia courseware sharing platform based on gae,” in E-Health
Networking, Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (EDT), 2010 Interna-
tional Conference on, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 289–292.
[11] M. Wannous and H. Nakano, “Nvlab, a networking virtual web-based
laboratory that implements virtualization and virtual network computing
technologies,” Learning Technologies, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 129–138, 2010.
[12] M. Gusev, S. Ristov, G. Velkoski, and B. Ivanovska, “E-learning and
benchmarking platform for parallel and distributed computing,” Inter-
national Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 2014, in
press.
[13] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and G. Velkoski, “Cloud e-learning and bench-
marking platform for the parallel and distributed computing course,”
in Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 2014 IEEE,
Istanbul, Turkey, 2014, p. in press.
[14] C. Bastidas, “Enabling remote access to computer networking laborato-
ries for distance education,” in Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE),
2011, 2011, pp. F3C–1–F3C–6.
[15] LiiT, “Laboratory for Internet and Innovative Technologies,” [retrieved:
Jan, 2014]. [Online]. Available: http://liit.finki.ukim.mk/
[16] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, G. Armenski, K. Bozinoski, and G. Velkoski,
“Architecture and organization of e-assessment cloud solution,” in IEEE
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 2013 IEEE.
Berlin, Germany: IEEE, Mar. 2013, pp. 736–743, best Paper Award.
[17] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, G. Armenski, and G. Velkoski, “Scalable and
elastic e-assessment cloud solution,” in Global Engineering Education
Conference (EDUCON), 2014 IEEE, Istanbul, Turkey, 2014, p. in press.
[18] D. Dinevski, “Open educational resources and lifelong learning,” in
Information Technology Interfaces, 2008. ITI 2008. 30th International
Conference on, 2008, pp. 117–122.
[19] C. T. Delistavrou and K. G. Margaritis, “Towards an integrated teaching
environment for parallel programming,” in Proceedings of the 2011 15th
Panhellenic Conference on Informatics, ser. PCI ’11, 2011, pp. 3–7.
[20] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, “A new methodology for security
evaluation in cloud computing,” in MIPRO, 2012 Proceedings of the 35th
International Convention, 2012, pp. 1484–1489.
[21] D. Pop, D. Zutin, M. Auer, K. Henke, and H. D. Wuttke, “An online
lab to support a master program in remote engineering,” in Frontiers in
Education Conference (FIE), 2011, 2011, pp. GOLC2–1–GOLC2–6.
[22] L. Gardner, D. Sheridan, and D. White, “A web-based learning and
assessment system to support flexible education,” Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 125–136, June 2002.
[23] P. Orsmond, S. Merry, and A. Callaghan, “Implementation of a formative
assessment model incorporating peer and selfassessment,” Innovations
in Education and Teaching International, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 273–290,
2004.
[24] G.-J. Hwang and H.-F. Chang, “A formative assessment-based mobile
learning approach to improving the learning attitudes and achievements
of students,” Comput. Educ., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1023–1031, May 2011.
[25] M. Gusev, S. Ristov, G. Armenski, P. Gushev, and G. Velkoski, “E-
assessment with interactive images,” in Global Engineering Education
Conference (EDUCON), 2014 IEEE, Istanbul, Turkey, 2014, p. in press.
