Title: Teaching Programming and Microcontrollers with an Arduino Remote Laboratory Application
Authors: A. Bukovac, E. Pleše, U. Maravić, P. Petrović, T. Jagušt
Year: 2023
Conference: MIPRO Junior (Student Papers)
Priority: HIGH - Need FULL PAPER

Relevance: Remote lab for teaching + Junior paper scope example

Abstract:
This paper presents our work on an educational
web system that teaches programming and microcontroller
basics using the Arduino board in remote laboratory
settings. In response to the shift towards remote and
distance learning brought by the COVID-19 pandemic, and
in an effort to alleviate the issue of continuous equipment
shortage in many Croatian schools, we developed and tested
a client-server architecture-based interactive remote
laboratory system called RemoLab.
The system consists of a web-based frontend
application, a backend server with an accompanying
database, and additional tools for connectivity with an
Arduino microcontroller and a webcam. The system allows
students to remotely write code for real hardware and
instantly observe the results of their actions through a
connected web camera.
The RemoLab system has the potential to enable
teachers in enriching their online courses or homework
assignments, but also back up students in independent
learning and experimentation with Arduino or
microcontrollers. We believe that this application has the
potential to improve the way students learn microcontroller
programming and can be used as an effective tool for
distance learning.


---
Notes after reading abstract:


---
Full Paper:

Teaching rogrammin nd icrocontrollers
with an Arduino emot aboratory
Application
Antonio Bukovac, Eva Pleše, Una Maravić, Petra Petrović, Tomislav Jagušt
University of Zagreb
Faculty of Electrical engineering and Computing
Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb
{antonio.bukovac, eva.plese, una.maravic, petra.petrovic, tomislav.jagust}@fer.hr
Abstract. This paper presents our work on an educational
web system that teaches programming and microcontroller
basics using the Arduino board in remote laboratory
settings. In response to the shift towards remote and
distance learning brought by the COVID-19 pandemic, and
in an effort to alleviate the issue of continuous equipment
shortage in many Croatian schools, we developed and tested
a client-server architecture-based interactive remote
laboratory system called RemoLab.
The system consists of a web-based frontend
application, a backend server with an accompanying
database, and additional tools for connectivity with an
Arduino microcontroller and a webcam. The system allows
students to remotely write code for real hardware and
instantly observe the results of their actions through a
connected web camera.
The RemoLab system has the potential to enable
teachers in enriching their online courses or homework
assignments, but also back up students in independent
learning and experimentation with Arduino or
microcontrollers. We believe that this application has the
potential to improve the way students learn microcontroller
programming and can be used as an effective tool for
distance learning.
Keywords. remote laboratory, arduino, programming,
technology-enhanced education, sensors, iterative learning
I. INTRODUCTION
The standard method for conducting lab
exercises is to set up a laboratory on campus with all
necessary equipment, allowing students to apply their
theoretical knowledge from lectures to practical work.
Because online education is growing in popularity due to
its flexibility, practical exercises are also being adapted
for online learning through remote laboratories.
Remote laboratories, which allow students to
conduct experiments online without physical access to
equipment, are making practical components of education
possible and more accessible through remote learning
[1]. In traditional labs, students interact directly with
equipment through physical actions (e.g. hand gestures,
pressing buttons, turning knobs) and receive feedback
through their senses. In remote labs, the same interactions
occur remotely through a user interface and remote
infrastructure.
In this article, we will provide an overview of
several remote laboratories that currently exist.
Additionally, we will develop our own remote laboratory,
which will be designed for teaching the programming of
an Arduino board. Using a web application, users will
have the ability to write code, which will then be
executed on the Arduino board. As feedback, they will
receive a live video feed, allowing them to see the results
of their code in real-time.
II. RELATED WORK
Given that Arduino boards are increasingly
being used in education and that online learning has
become necessary and popular, there is an increasing
number of papers on the subject of remote laboratories
for programming and using Arduino boards as well as for
other areas of knowledge.
Fernández-Pacheco et al. [2] highlighted the
advantages and necessary components of remote
laboratories. They designed their own remote laboratory
using an Arduino MKR1000 Wi-Fi board, Raspberry Pi
as the application server and Web camera for streaming
the impact of code, providing students with an
opportunity to experiment and explore the Internet of
Things (IoT) using any platform, hardware, and software
without the need to download additional extensions.
In their paper [3], Martin et al. described some
of the many experiments that can be carried out using the
1968 MIPRO 2023/SP
previously described remote laboratory, which are used
by students in the Electronics Engineering Degree in a
Distance Learning University as part of the mandatory
practices of a class. The work with an LED cube, various
Arduino sensors, and an LCD screen is presented.
Kalúz et al. [4] presented a low-cost remote
laboratory for control education. Their remote laboratory
is based on Raspberry Pi and Arduino controllers for
education in the field of process control and allows
efficient energy usage and problem management without
a supervisor. The goal of their project is to familiarize
students with specific experiments, where they cannot
modify or test the programming code for the Arduino, but
only change certain values that affect the outcome of
these precise experiments.
In their paper [5], Carro et al. described the use
of a remote laboratory as an additional tool for teaching.
The paper does not relate to learning programming or the
use of Arduino, but rather presents a remote smart device
and a remote laboratory with an RGB LED as a tool for
learning about the physics of color, various perceptions of
color, etc., and for improving interaction between
students and teachers.
Lima et al. [6] described and designed a remote
Arduino laboratory used for learning that can be
accessed through two types of applications: one uses a
visual and the other a textual programming language for
learning Arduino programming. The user can see the
code they input being executed on a remote Arduino
board.
Fig. 1. RemoLab system architecture
The RemoLab system setup contains two
servers, web server for the end-user application and the
camera image server:
● The web server for the backend of the
application runs on .NET and SQL Server
database and is responsible for user
authentication, showing tutorials in the
application and uploading code to the Arduino
microcontroller.
● The camera server runs on Node.js in
combination with SocketIO and node-cam
package. It is responsible for capturing and
sending images to the clients.
III. REMOLAB ARCHITECTURE
This chapter explains the architectural elements
of the RemoLab project. The central component is a
microcontroller board Arduino Uno that acts as the main
control unit. Arduino is an open source electronic kit
specifically designed as a controller that regulates the
workings of other electronic circuits [7]. Multiple
components are connected to the board: a temperature
sensor, a servo motor, RGB LED and 16x2 LCD screen
which are used to provide feedback to the user and can be
manipulated by the program code uploaded to the
Arduino board. The connection between the Arduino
board and a computer is done through the USB port (Fig.
1.).
The WebCam is used to capture images and send
them to the user’s screen every few seconds. Currently,
all components are connected to a computer. However,
for better system flexibility, components could be
connected to a Raspberry Pi, which would act as the main
hub for data processing and communication.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Several lessons were created that cover different
fields of programming and electronics. Temperature
sensor was chosen because it is simple and it gives
students a basic understanding of sensor readings [8] and
displaying results in a suitable way using LCD [9]. Servo
motor is used as a component because it is an important
part in dynamic projects like robotic arms [10] or remote
controlled cars [11].
Students can easily access this laboratory by
visiting the RemoLab website. On the website, students
are presented with different categories, each containing
simple tutorials and questions.
These educational resources are designed to help
students in learning the fundamental concepts and
commands of the Arduino device, and provide them with
hands-on experience by allowing students to apply what
they have learned through the tutorials on the actual
Arduino device.
The code input page shows the camera image
next to the code input field, allowing students to see the
results of their actions in real-time (Fig. 2.). After
entering the code, students can submit it to the server for
compilation and execution on the Arduino. The camera
MIPRO 2023/SP 1969
display provides feedback on the execution of the code
and helps students determine whether the code is
functioning as intended. This setup allows students to
visualize the results of their code and make adjustments
as necessary.
Celsius and this knowledge can be applied to
other sensors such as humidity, light, etc.
● Servo motor
In this exercise, students will learn how
to control a servo motor using Arduino.
Furthermore, this lesson teaches how to add
"libraries" to the Arduino project and how to use
them. In this particular case, students have to
add the “Servo” library. This will help them to
further seek and apply existing solutions that
they can use to simplify certain parts of their
projects.
In this experiment students will
perform a simple movement of a servo motor.
Using the delay function and loops, they can
create some interesting solutions. The aim is to
familiarize students with the basic control of a
servo motor and how libraries can be added and
used in their Arduino code.
Fig 2. GUI of the experiment
There are four devices connected on the Arduino
that students can program and control (Fig. 3.). The
benefit of having all four devices on the same board is
that students can easily experiment with multiple devices
at once. This allows for a greater understanding of how
different devices can interact with one another and opens
up opportunities for more complex projects. For instance,
the color of a RGB LED can be changed based on the
measured temperature, demonstrating the relationship
between two components.
Three devices, with accompanying exercises, are:
● RGB LED
Goal of the RGB LED experiment is to
teach basic functions/commands such as setting
pins to OUTPUT, INPUT, and using the delay
function. This will introduce students to the
most important functions they will use in further
experiments, in a fun and engaging way.
Additionally, students will be introduced to the
concept of RGB color model and have hands-on
experience with it. Ability to change colors
provides additional possibilities compared to a
regular LED and makes the learning experience
more enjoyable for the students.
● Temperature sensor
The lesson with temperature sensor
aims is to familiarize students with the basics of
reading values from sensors. Here we use a
temperature sensor as one of the basic sensors.
In this exercise, students will also learn
about converting analog inputs into meaningful
values. In this example additional operations are
required to obtain the temperature in e.g. degrees
Fig. 3. Arduino board with LED, servo motor, temperature sensor and
LCD screen
V. CONCLUSION
This paper describes the architecture and
implementation of a remote laboratory for teaching
microcontroller programming. The RemoLab system
includes several components, such as a temperature
sensor, servo motor, RGB LED, and a camera for live
feedback. The system allows users to write code through
a web application, which is then sent on server, compiled
and uploaded to the Arduino board. Program execution
results can be observed through the embedded web
camera.This allows us to have an iterative learning
experience, where we test something, observe the results,
and make adjustments to try again.
1970 MIPRO 2023/SP
The RemoLab remote laboratory provides
students with a simple way to learn about Arduino
programming and experiment with different components,
all from the comfort of their own devices. This type of
remote laboratory can be a valuable addition to any
education curriculum and can make it more accessible for
students to learn about technology and programming.
REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Corter, J. V. Nickerson, S. K. Esche and C. Chassapis,
"Remote versus hands-on labs: a comparative study," 34th Annual
Frontiers in Education, 2004. FIE 2004., Savannah, GA, USA,
2004, pp. F1G-17, doi: 10.1109/FIE.2004.1408586.
[2] A. Fernández-Pacheco, S. Martin, and M. Castro,
“Implementation of an Arduino remote laboratory with raspberry
Pi,” in Proc. IEEE Global Eng. Educ. Conf. (EDUCON), Apr.
2019, pp. 1415–1418.
[3] S. Martin, A. Fernandez-Pacheco, G. Carro, J.A.
Ruipérez-Valiente and M. Castro, “Remote Experimentation
Through Arduino-Based Remote Laboratories” in IEEE Revista
Iberoamericana de Tecnologias del Aprendizaje, vol. 16, no. 2,
May 2021, pp. 180.-186.
[4] M. Kalúz, L. Cirka, R. Valo, and M. Fikar, “ArPi lab: A low-cost
remote laboratory for control education,” IFAC Proc. Volumes,
vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 9057–9062, 2014.
[5] G. Carro et al., “The color of the light: A remote laboratory that
uses a smart device that connects teachers and students,” in Proc.
IEEE Global Eng. Educ. Conf. (EDUCON), Apr. 2014, pp.
854–860.
[6] J. P. C. de Lima, L. M. Carlos, J. P. S. Simão, J. Pereira, P. M.
Mafra, and J. B. da Silva, “Design and implementation of a
remote lab for teaching programming and robotics,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 49, no. 30, pp. 86–91, 2016.
[7] Darmawan, Aan & Ratnadewi, Ratnadewi & Sartika, Erwani &
Pasaribu, Novie & Arlando, Riko. (2017). Basic Arduino
Programming Training For High School Students. THE SPIRIT
OF SOCIETY JOURNAL. 1. 10.29138/scj.v1i1.456.
[8] M. Kusriyanto and A. A. Putra, "Weather Station Design Using
IoT Platform Based On Arduino Mega," 2018 International
Symposium on Electronics and Smart Devices (ISESD), Bandung,
Indonesia, 2018, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/ISESD.2018.8605456.
[9] G. M. Debele and X. Qian, "Automatic Room Temperature
Control System Using Arduino UNO R3 and DHT11 Sensor,"
2020 17th International Computer Conference on Wavelet Active
Media Technology and Information Processing (ICCWAMTIP),
Chengdu, China, 2020, pp. 428-432, doi:
10.1109/ICCWAMTIP51612.2020.9317307.
[10] V. Varshney, A. Kumar, T. Saxena, P. Jha, M. N. Tiwari and
Savita, "Design and Development of Intellectual Robotic Arm,"
2019 6th International Conference on Computing for Sustainable
Global Development (INDIACom), New Delhi, India, 2019, pp.
984-987.
[11] Yuxin Jing, Letian Zhang, I. Arce and A. Farajidavar, "AndroRC:
An Android remote control car unit for search missions," IEEE
Long Island Systems, Applications and Technology (LISAT)
Conference 2014, Farmingdale, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 1-5, doi:
10.1109/LISAT.2014.6845227.


